{
    "title": "Sexual Scandal and Catholicism in Victorian England: The Case of Monsignor Thomas John Capel*",
    "author": "Timothy Verhoeven",
    "date": "29 May 2022",
    "article": "This article investigates a sexual scandal that rocked the English Catholic Church in the Victorian era. Though forgotten today, Monsignor Thomas John Capel was one of the most famous clerics in the Victorian Church. His career fell into turmoil when, in 1879, Cardinal Henry Edward Manning launched a diocesan commission to investigate charges of sexual misconduct involving three women. Drawing on a series of rich and as yet unexplored archival sources, the article charts the career of Thomas Capel and assesses the nature, aims and outcomes of the Church-run inquiry into his conduct. Through an analysis of the actions not just of Capel but of Church authorities both in Westminster and in Rome, we gain a revealing window onto sexual scandal and the Church\u2019s response to it in the nineteenth century.In 1879 the Catholic Church in England was embroiled in a sexual scandal involving one of its most famous clerics. Though forgotten today, Monsignor Thomas John Capel (1836\u20131911) was a star of the Victorian church. A charismatic preacher and tireless networker, Capel dazzled English society in the 1870s, winning a string of converts from the Protestant elite, sparring in polemical bouts with Anglican divines as well as with Prime Minister William Gladstone, and appearing in countless press profiles. When the bishops appointed him rector of one of their flagship initiatives, the Catholic University in Kensington, his rise seemed unstoppable. Capel\u2019s career, however, was soon in turmoil. Financial mismanagement of the university prompted the bishops to demand his resignation in 1878. The following year, a Diocesan Commission began investigating serious charges of sexual misconduct involving three women. For the next four years Capel would fight to save his career and reputation, a fight that pitted him against one of the titans of the Victorian Catholic Church, Cardinal Henry Edward Manning, and which reached as far as Rome.A sexual scandal entangling a popular cleric along with an eminent Cardinal as well as a series of figures in the Vatican would seem an obvious target of scholarly interest. Yet historians have either ignored or merely sketched the outlines of the story. No biographer has tackled Capel\u2019s life and career. Historians of English Catholicism mention his disastrous tenure as rector of the Catholic University, but their focus is on financial ineptitude rather than sexual turpitude. J. Derek Holmes refers to \u2018rumours\u2019 of a \u2018liaison with a young woman\u2019, before dismissing them with the comment that \u2018the number and seriousness of the incidents were probably exaggerated\u2019.[CITATION-1] The eminent scholar Edward Norman unearthed part of the story in Manning\u2019s correspondence with his friend Bishop William Clifford, but could only furnish vague references to immorality.[CITATION-2] Recent works have done little better. Theentry on Capel mentions \u2018a charge of misconduct, involving young women\u2019.[CITATION-3] More detail appears in Tom Horwood\u2019s 2003 account of the demise of the Catholic University. Yet even here, Capel\u2019s sexual misdeeds are a minor element in a larger story of opposition to the project on the part of factions within the Church.[CITATION-4] Remarkably, the fullest account of the Capel scandal dates from the Victorian era. In writing his 1895, Edmund Sheridan Purcell enjoyed unfiltered access to his subject\u2019s correspondence and diaries. To the dismay of the Cardinal\u2019s friends, Purcell used this privileged position to paint Manning as ambitious, unscrupulous and hypocritical. When he turned to Capel, Purcell hinted at a lewd scandal, citing a note from Manning in which he blamed the University\u2019s collapse on its reputation for \u2018immorality\u2019, a reputation which stemmed from the behaviour of its rector.[CITATION-5] Correspondence between the diocese and the Vatican showed Manning\u2019s determination to discipline Capel.[CITATION-6] Yet the precise nature of the charges against him remained a mystery. Purcell was content to direct the curious or baffled reader to consult the files directly.[CITATION-7] Subsequent biographers offered brief and vague references only.[CITATION-8] The sensitive nature of the topic may partly explain this limited scholarship. But historians have been stymied as well by the difficulty of consulting key archives. One important collection, the archive of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (Inquisition) in Rome, opened fully to researchers only as recently as 1998. Another, the papers of Cardinal Manning, was for decades under the control of a French priest, Father Alphonse Chapeau (1905\u201389), at the University of Angers in France. To his great credit, Chapeau preserved the records, which were in an extremely poor state, and saved many from destruction. However, he was, by all accounts, a strict gatekeeper in relation to other scholars.[CITATION-9] Only in 2014, when the Westminster Diocesan Archives (WDA) obtained them, did the bulk of the Manning papers become accessible to researchers.[CITATION-10] The third and most revealing collection, a series of files relating directly to Capel, had already been acquired by the WDA before that date. But the problem for historians was that until 2009 they were not properly sorted and listed, and their contents therefore remained largely unknown.[CITATION-11] Drawing on the abundant and now accessible records in both Westminster and Rome, this article gives the first detailed account of the downfall of one of the most celebrated clerics in the Victorian age. The significance of this story goes well beyond the fame of its key protagonists or its reverberations within the English Catholic Church. More than this, it opens a window onto a subject that we know little about: clerical sexual scandal in the nineteenth century and the Church\u2019s strategies for dealing with it. When historians of the modern era have turned their attention to immorality in the priesthood, their focus has been on representations. The lecherous priest was a stock figure in an anti-Catholic literature which, ranging from lewd pamphlets to high-minded works of fiction, imagined the confessional and convent as dark spaces filled with illicit eroticism.[CITATION-12] Such tales served a range of cultural purposes, from allowing high-minded readers to indulge in voyeurism to whipping up hostility to the Church and throwing into relief the virtues of the Protestant home. The aggressive priests who roamed the pages of the popular stories of escaped nuns were a stark warning to all young women of the perils of straying from the domestic sphere.[CITATION-13] What historians have largely failed to do is to go beyond representations and to dig into the archives to find cases of priests who broke their vow of chastity and were subject to disciplinary processes.[CITATION-14] In contrast, historians of the medieval and early modern periods have unearthed many such cases. The phenomenon of clerical concubinage across Europe has been extensively studied.[CITATION-15] Drawing on the records of the Spanish Inquisition, Stephen Haliczer details cases of sexual misconduct on the part of confessors towards their female penitents.[CITATION-16] Irene Fosi has investigated how the justice system of the papal states in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries policed deviant sexual behaviour among clerics.[CITATION-17] These scholars note that such behaviour continued to be recorded long after the Council of Trent, which forcefully restated the rule of celibacy while introducing a series of reforms, such as the enclosure of convents, to encourage sexual discipline. Priests in eighteenth-century France regularly appeared before church tribunals after being denounced by parishioners.[CITATION-18] But historians of the nineteenth century have not followed the lead of these scholars. As a result, there remains much to discover about the nature of such cases, the attitude of Church leaders when confronted with accusations against priests, and the disciplinary processes which they set in motion.The case of Thomas Capel offers a precious insight into these questions, thanks to its rich archival base. The files, which detail a series of investigations into his conduct and character, are abundant and varied, encompassing private and official letters, witness testimony and tribunal reports. This trove of material opens up several lines of inquiry. First, we begin to see how a charismatic priest could engage in illicit behaviour for years without being unmasked. Secondly, the archives allow us to assess the response of Church leaders. Importantly, the records capture this response in the diocese of Westminster as well as in the Vatican, showing the often tense relationship between different layers of authority. Finally, we hear the voices of Capel\u2019s accusers. Admittedly, these voices do not come to us unfiltered. They were mediated through Church structures, whether the Diocesan Commission of investigation, or the religious repository that determined which documents to keep and which to discard. Nevertheless, the records allow us to piece together an account that goes beyond the perspective of the Church and which gives proper weight to the testimony of women who accused priests of breaking their vow of chastity.This article begins with a brief survey of the steep ascent of Thomas John Capel from relative obscurity to his appointment as rector of the Catholic University in Kensington. It then examines the first series of accusations concerning his sexual behaviour, and Cardinal Manning\u2019s response to them. The unfolding of the 1879 Diocesan Commission of Inquiry is the focus of the next section, followed by the dramatic intervention of the Vatican. The concluding section charts Capel\u2019s final disgrace as well as the traumatic consequences for the women at the heart of the scandal.The rise to fame of Thomas John Capel coincided with a flourishing period for the Catholic Church in England. Its resurgence began in the early decades of the century, with the 1829 Relief Act opening most public offices to Catholics. It accelerated after 1850 in response to two developments. First, the Vatican restored a full episcopal hierarchy, and secondly, an influx of working-class Irish immigrants triggered a wave of church- and school-building.[CITATION-19] In 1850, the number of Catholic churches and clergy in England and Wales stood at 587 and 788; twenty years later, they had grown to 1,151 and 1,528 respectively. The number of schools increased from 99 in 1850 to 1,484 in 1874.[CITATION-20] Another sign of renewal was the re-establishment of monastic orders such as the Dominicans and Franciscans. This was the era of famous Anglican converts. One of these was Cardinal John Henry Newman, who in 1852 proclaimed the Church to be enjoying its \u2018Second Spring\u2019, and who would become a widely admired writer and theologian.[CITATION-21] But it was another Anglican convert who put his stamp most firmly on the Church\u2019s direction. Henry Edward Manning enjoyed a meteoric rise after his conversion in 1851, becoming the second Archbishop of Westminster in 1865 and Cardinal a decade later. Manning consolidated the Church\u2019s shift towards Ultramontanism, emerging as one of the most zealous advocates of the doctrine of papal infallibility. At home, he worked tirelessly on a number of fronts: imposing a centralised and efficient administration, expanding the school network and aligning the Church with popular social reform, most famously when he mediated the London Dock Strike of 1889.[CITATION-22] He was also unswerving in his commitment to improving the quality of his clergy. The priest, as he set out in his book \u2018The Eternal Priesthood\u2019, should be a model of selflessness, purity and discipline.[CITATION-23] The Cardinal set the tone with his legendary personal austerity, eschewing the trappings of wealth, abstaining from alcohol and fulminating against the theatre. But this, combined with his authoritarian style, made him a distant and often abrasive figure, especially in contrast to the more genial Newman.[CITATION-24] Thomas John Capel came from a different mould. To begin with, he was not an Anglican convert but was born into the Catholic Church, a fact that he would deploy in his efforts to discredit his accusers. Nor did he enjoy the classical Oxbridge education of Newman and Manning. Instead, Capel trained as a teacher, obtaining his certificate from St Mary\u2019s Roman Catholic Teacher Training College, Brook Green, in 1853, before being ordained six years later. This was a humble start to a priestly career. But Capel exuded charm and this, allied to a keen eye for identifying men of influence, fuelled his ascent. By 1867 he was chaplain to Charles Scott Murray, a Conservative MP, and through him became close friends with John Patrick Crichton-Stuart, third marquess of Bute, who was one of the wealthiest members of the nobility.[CITATION-25] In 1868, having delivered a series of popular sermons at St Clement\u2019s Chapel in Oxford, Capel received Bute into the Church. The conversion of Bute shocked British society and sealed Capel\u2019s fame. A mark of his newfound notoriety was his appearance in Benjamin Disraeli\u2019s fictionalised account of the Bute affair,. An enormous hit upon its publication in 1870,tells the story of a Scottish aristocrat who is torn between Anglicanism and Roman-Catholicism. A cast of Catholics try to lure him into their faith, including the pompous Cardinal Grandison, Disraeli\u2019s barely concealed caricature of Manning. But it is the magnetic and devious Monsignore Catesby, a character that Disraeli admitted to have drawn directly from Capel, who embodies Catholicism at its most insidious and alluring.[CITATION-26] In the decade that followed, Capel\u2019s star continued to rise. In an age that valued oratory, he shone as a compelling public speaker, impressing all with his sheer energy as he criss-crossed the country lecturing on topics from materialism to confession and from women\u2019s rights to the art of Raphael. This popular appeal was matched by his extraordinary capacity to win over the social elite. In its series \u2018Men of the Day\u2019,labelled him \u2018the apostle of the genteel\u2019, noting his handsome features, easy charm and sheer likeability.[CITATION-27] His Sunday afternoon gatherings at his home in Kensington became famous for their eclectic cast of guests. They drew, as one paper wrote, \u2018clever people of both sexes, of all religions, and even of no religion\u2019.[CITATION-28] Many of these clever people wrote about their encounters with Capel in London\u2019s drawing rooms and private clubs. The editor of the satirical magazine, Shirley Brooks, found him \u2018delightful\u2019 and \u2018full of information\u2019.[CITATION-29] When the former President Ulysses S. Grant visited London on his world tour of 1877, Capel was the only non-American invited to a private dinner on Independence Day.[CITATION-30] Far from merely frivolous, this socialising brought the Catholic Church a crop of influential converts. Newspapers reported the details of his latest successes; \u2018his converts alone\u2019, one wrote, \u2018would fill the pro-Cathedral at Kensington\u2019.[CITATION-31] By the end of the decade, one Anglican writer could claim that Thomas John Capel was \u2018the most popular Catholic ecclesiastic in England\u2019, a man whose fame exceeded even that of Cardinal Manning.[CITATION-32] Far from resenting Capel\u2019s success, Manning entrusted him with the leadership of one of his most cherished initiatives. The Catholic University College in Kensington became a priority for Manning and the English and Welsh bishops once they had decided that Catholics should not be educated in Protestant institutions, a decision subsequently confirmed by Rome. Designed to cater to middle- and upper-class men between the ages of 17 and 22, the College would offer an education that aligned with Catholic principles, and was seen by Manning as the first step towards the establishment of a broad-based Catholic university system. It was, in other words, a critical endeavour, and it was a mark of Capel\u2019s standing that he seemed the obvious choice to lead it. Apart from his \u2018extraordinary energy\u2019, as one paper wrote, \u2018his personal influence with the wealthy Catholics is notoriously extensive and powerful\u2019.[CITATION-33] Capel was in place as rector when the opening term began in October 1874.The public image of a successful and devoted priest, however, concealed a troubling series of accusations. Well before the bishops appointed Capel as rector, Manning, the stickler for clerical standards, knew that he was under a cloud of serious allegations. In 1870, two American sisters complained to Manning that Capel \u2018acted with immodesty\u2019 towards one of them during their stay in Rome. Nor was this the only claim. In 1873 a French priest alleged that Capel had engaged in \u2018criminal intercourse\u2019 with a servant on one occasion as well as repeatedly with a governess over a period of three years. In response, Manning confronted Capel, who angrily denied all charges and threatened to sue the priest for defamation in civil court.[CITATION-34] The next charge came from much closer to home. In 1875, Manning received a letter from a 23-year-old woman named Mary Stourton. He would have recognised her family name. Mary\u2019s grandfather was a Catholic peer, the eighteenth Baron Stourton, who had been one of the most vocal advocates of Catholic emancipation; her father, William, was the younger brother of the nineteenth baron. She began by begging Manning to keep her identity secret, for fear that Capel might turn her family against her. Then she recounted the painful story of her life. Miserable at her family home, she had run away with a married man. She made this admission fully conscious that she had been \u2018weak and very wicked\u2019, but hopeful that Manning would nevertheless believe her story. Abandoned by the man, and cut off from friends and family, she came to the attention of the famous Monsignor Capel. At first he posed as her protector, promising to soothe relations with her family. What happened next, she wrote, was \u2018hard to write\u2019. Her priest and protector set out \u2018deliberately\u2019 and in a \u2018heartless way\u2019 to \u2018ruin me still more\u2019. Such was his power over her that she \u2018dared not resist him\u2019 as he became a regular evening visitor to her home. What she now desired above all was to see him unmasked. Capel, she wrote with disgust, was revered for his good works and piety. Her own aunt told her she was blessed to have such a friend. It would \u2018drive me mad,\u2019 Stourton wrote, \u2018to think that such numbers of really good people should be so deluded as to look on him as they do\u2019.[CITATION-35] In assessing Manning\u2019s response, the first point to consider is that church authorities were hardly blind to the possibility that priests might break their vow of chastity. The first four provincial synods after the 1850 restoration laid down safeguards to protect priests against erotic temptation. Unsupervised contact with young women was to be avoided as far as possible. Confessors were instructed to hear female penitents only in \u2018an open place, where they can be easily seen by others\u2019.[CITATION-36] Priests should employ servants who were \u2018advanced in years, and known for their modesty, prudence and blameless lives\u2019.[CITATION-37] A subsequent guide for priests offered more detailed measures, from leaving doors open when speaking in private to avoiding eye contact and keeping conversations as brief as possible.[CITATION-38] In the event that these safeguards failed, a disciplinary process would swing into action. Under rules approved at the First Provincial Synod, the Archbishop had the power to appoint a Commission of Inquiry to investigate and to rule on clerical misconduct. Two aspects of the Commission\u2019s rules of procedure stand out. First, it was not bound by judicial norms. Witnesses, for example, were not forced to swear an oath before testifying. A verdict was therefore unlikely to stand up in court. But this approach gave the Commission the flexibility to achieve its primary goal, namely to \u2018form as accurate a judgement as is possible as to the truth\u2019. The second key aspect of the process was its confidentiality. The Archbishop was enjoined to \u2018order secrecy to be kept as to all matters that transpire\u2019.[CITATION-39] Public exposure was to be avoided at all costs.It was at Manning\u2019s discretion to institute a formal proceeding against Capel. Rather than adopt this course, though, he took another approach. Ignoring Stourton\u2019s plea for anonymity, he conveyed her charges directly to Capel and once again demanded a response. The response took the form of a vicious personal attack. Stourton, in Capel\u2019s account, was a damaged, vindictive and above all sexually licentious woman. To prove this, he gave Manning a copy of a letter that Stourton had entrusted to him, and that gave harrowing details about her sexual history. Though she did not use the term, Stourton was the victim of rape. Her assailant was a married man whom she met during a stay at his aunt\u2019s house. One night he entered her bedroom and, as she described it, \u2018awoke me and did it and was gone before I was scarcely awake\u2019. She did not immediately understand what had occurred, and it was only some months later, having listened to other people and done some reading, that she revealed the crime to her mother. Far from showing any sympathy, her mother ordered her to go to confession and to undertake a spiritual retreat. This left her shocked and angered, and when her assailant began sending letters declaring his love, she seized the chance to escape a home where she felt lonely and miserable. They met in a hotel, and spent a week posing as a married couple.Capel hoped that this confession would destroy Stourton\u2019s credibility. Regardless of the circumstances, her decision to run away with a married man was proof, as he wrote to Manning, of the \u2018iniquities of this unfortunate girl\u2019.[CITATION-40] As several studies have shown, trials for sexual assault and rape in Victorian courts hinged on the character of both the victim and the accused. Men deemed to be respectable stood a much higher chance of acquittal. Women with a reputation for promiscuity were seldom believed.[CITATION-41] To reinforce her duplicity, Capel then provided Manning with letters in which she professed her friendship and admiration for him. \u2018Sad it is,\u2019 he wrote, to \u2018see such hypocrisy\u2019.[CITATION-42] Unfortunately, Manning left no record of his reflections. Given that this was the third accusation against Capel in five years, he must have entertained some doubts about his denials. But it is unclear if he was willing to believe Stourton, a young woman who, from his perspective, lacked the support of her family, confessed to engaging in illicit behaviour and showed affection for Capel even after he had so cruelly exploited her vulnerability. Another factor may have been his determination to see the Catholic University succeed. Launching an investigation into its rector less than a year after his appointment would not only be embarrassing but could prove fatal to the entire project. We can only speculate about his reasoning, but the upshot was that Manning decided to let the matter rest.In December 1878, the Cardinal finally convoked a Commission of Inquiry and set off a process that would lead to Capel\u2019s suspension. What was different this time? An obvious change was the poisoning of relations caused by Capel\u2019s disastrous stewardship of the University. Historians have identified several factors in its demise: the preference for Oxford and Cambridge among elite Catholics; the hostility of the English Jesuits to a scheme that undercut their plans for a college of higher studies; and the lack of support from Cardinal Newman.[CITATION-43] But Manning placed much of the blame on the negligence of its rector. In particular, Manning was angry that Capel broke a promise to give up involvement in a school for middle- and upper-class Catholics that he had founded in 1872. As a result, he failed to give the University \u2018the undivided care absolutely needed for success\u2019.[CITATION-44] The bishops soon discovered that he did not keep proper financial records, and could not even provide a statement of the financial position. Capel, Manning wrote in his journal, has \u2018wrecked our only united work\u2019.[CITATION-45] In an act that embittered relations further, Capel then claimed several thousand pounds from the diocese for expenses incurred during his rectorship.A second difference lay in the protagonists at the heart of the fresh allegations. Mary Stourton was a young woman with a troubled past who was cut off from the support of her family and the Catholic community. Now the accusations centred on a servant and her mistress, a respectable widow who was well known in Kensington and who enjoyed the backing of two prominent Catholic men, one of whom was her confessor. On 5 December 1878, Dr Henry Willington wrote to Manning to warn him of a \u2018scandal, that if it once gets into print\u2014as it will sooner or later \u2026 will be the largest scandal of modern times \u2026 in the Holy Catholic Church of England\u2019. Willington claimed to have proof that a priest in Kensington had \u2018made an attempt to debauch a young woman\u2019 and engaged in a series of \u2018lecheries\u2019 with another.[CITATION-46] At a subsequent meeting, he named Capel as well as the two women. The first was a servant named Lucy Stevens. The second was Stevens\u2019s mistress, Mrs Emily Bellew, who confided to Willington that she had engaged in sexual intercourse with Capel on many occasions over several years. This time Manning did not hesitate. On 27 January 1879, Capel was notified that a Diocesan Commission had been established to investigate acts of \u2018criminal intercourse\u2019 with Mary Stourton and Emily Bellew, and of \u2018indecent liberties\u2019 against Lucy Stevens. Two days later he arrived at the Archbishop\u2019s residence in Westminster where, before the four members of the Commission\u2014Reverend George Last, Canon Richard MacMullan, Reverend Edward Pennington and Reverend Daniel Butler\u2014he began a desperate fight to save his clerical career.Over the next weeks, the Commission achieved its twin objectives: first, getting to the truth of the allegations, and secondly, keeping the story out of public view. Its starting point was the case of Lucy Stevens. In the autumn of 1878 Stevens complained to Bellew about Capel\u2019s behaviour. On her advice, she dictated the following account to Bellew\u2019s confessor, Father Walter Robinson. On the evening of 20 October, Capel invited her to his house on what she called a \u2018false pretence\u2019. Expecting a servant to open the door, she was instead confronted with a drunk and aggressive Capel, who dragged her into the dining room, where he implored her to come to his bedroom. She would not fall pregnant, he assured her, and he would buy her a silk dress and find her a good husband. \u2018I have no doubt\u2019, she reflected, \u2018he did all he could to seduce me\u2019.[CITATION-47] Stevens managed to push him away and flee.Throughout its proceedings, the Commission was nothing if not thorough. Over a series of days it called a number of witnesses, including Lucy Stevens herself, and gave Capel the opportunity to rebut her accusation. He sought to do so in two ways. First he impugned her motives. Stevens, he alleged, had lost her position in Bellew\u2019s household after he reported seeing her cavorting with two men. The story of the assault was her attempt at revenge. Unfortunately for Capel, this was contradicted by evidence that Stevens had voluntarily resigned her position. His second claim was more persuasive. In her testimony, Stevens placed the assault in the dining room. The problem was that a bailiff charged with recovering money from Capel had been lodging in his house. The bailiff testified to using the dining room as his sleeping quarters at the time of the assault. When probed by the Commissioners, Stevens could not explain the discrepancy between her account and that of the bailiff.[CITATION-48] Even worse, and in what must have been an extraordinary ordeal, she was then confronted with her assailant. Surprisingly, however, Capel asked a few perfunctory questions only. No doubt he was confident that, in the wake of the bailiff\u2019s testimony, her story would not ring true. Stevens\u2019s status as a working-class woman also counted against her; in court cases, domestic servants rarely won cases for sexual assault against middle-class men.[CITATION-49] Above all, he knew that his fate hinged on the allegations involving Emily Bellew.There were several reasons why her case was pivotal. Her name was well known on account of her second husband, John Bellew, like her a convert to Catholicism and a famous preacher and public reader. As a middle-class widow, she benefited from the aura of respectability that was such a crucial factor in shaping perceptions of guilt and innocence. Bolstering her credibility further was the fact that she was a member of the Catholic community in Kensington and had the backing of men such as Dr Willington and her confessor Father Robinson. A sign of her status in the eyes of the Commissioners was that, unlike Lucy Stevens, she was not called upon to testify. Pleading ill health, she was excused from appearing. Instead, the Commissioners relied on a statement she made to Manning out of confession in January 1879 as well as the testimony of Dr Willington. Here there was an immediate discrepancy. Bellew told Manning that she and Capel first had sex in the autumn of 1874, not long after the death of her husband. Dr Willington testified that the scandalous relationship began a year later. Both affirmed, however, that the relationship continued until 1878. To avoid detection by the servants when Capel visited her house at night, Bellew gave him a latch-key, with a prearranged signal\u2014the hall light left off\u2014indicating that it was safe to enter. Even her involvement in a railway accident did not deter him. In September 1878, Bellew was on a passenger train that collided with several goods wagons at Sittingbourne, Kent. Five people were killed; Bellew suffered broken ribs. Still, Capel continued his visits to her house.[CITATION-50] In response, Capel resorted to his usual strategy of character assassination. In his depiction, Emily Bellew was a drunk and a hysteric who regularly took large doses of chloral. Prompted by Capel, her doctor from 1870 to 1874 testified that she was flighty and prone to exaggeration; he had stopped seeing her because he \u2018thought her a woman of dangerous character\u2019.[CITATION-51] Capel then produced private letters to paint her as unstable and infatuated. In one, dated 28 January 1875, Bellew lamented that he was no longer replying to her. She appeared flirtatious, describing her nature as \u2018intensely loving\u2019 and one that \u2018gives all and asks little in return\u2019.[CITATION-52] This was a woman who, as Capel claimed in his defence, \u2018undoubtedly tried to throw herself on me\u2019.[CITATION-53] But her fixation could quickly turn to rage. As proof, he released another letter to the Commission. \u2018You\u2019ve behaved\u2019, she wrote. \u2018\u2019, she continued, \u2018unless\u2019.[CITATION-54] The portrait that emerged was damning\u2014Bellew was an intense, deranged woman who craved a handsome priest\u2019s company and who reacted with fury when rebuffed. Goading her on were two more villains in Capel\u2019s narrative, Dr Willington and Father Robinson. Both nursed grudges against Capel; both saw in Stevens and Bellew the ideal tools with which to cut him down. Robinson, driven by jealousy at Capel\u2019s success, coached Stevens as she recounted her story to him, encouraging her to add more and more fanciful elements. Willington, who had never forgiven Capel over a petty dispute, stoked Bellew\u2019s anger until, in a state of drug-induced hysteria after her accident, she invented her bizarre claim.All of this was torture for Bellew. It had not been her decision to denounce Capel; Dr Willington had triggered the entire procedure when he took it on himself to inform Manning. In a letter to her confessor, Father Robinson, she described her bitterness at being depicted as \u2018intemperate and mad\u2019. It was true that she had taken small doses of chloral to ease her pain after the railway accident, but since her recovery she had abstained entirely. As for the charge of drunkenness, it would be \u2018lowering myself by even giving it a denial\u2019. The \u2018miserable business\u2019, she wrote, had left her in a state of \u2018deep distress and nervousness\u2019.[CITATION-55] Her distress deepened when anonymous letters began arriving at her home. One writer, who claimed to know embarrassing details about her past, warned that her \u2018wicked statements\u2019 about Capel, a man \u2018whose goodness and kindness is proverbial\u2019, were sure \u2018to cause you some trouble\u2019. Her behaviour, the letter continued, was the \u2018subject of conversation at the London clubs\u2019.[CITATION-56] Capel appeared confident that his fellow priests would never take the word of three women over one of their own. We can imagine his shock, then, at the verdict. Writing on behalf of the Commission, Reverend Butler began with the case of Stevens. While troubled by the discrepancy between her account and the testimony of the bailiff, he concluded that it was \u2018probable\u2019 that \u2018some criminal occurrences\u2019 had taken place. Capel\u2019s subdued reaction to her testimony had not helped his cause. His reluctance to confront Stevens directly during the hearings left the impression, as Butler wrote, that he was \u2018afraid of her\u2019. The Commission then turned to Mary Stourton, who was abroad at the time of the hearings, and judged the veracity of her account to be \u2018very probable, terrible as it is\u2019. The Bellew case proved most damning. Brushing aside the discrepancy as to whether the relationship began in 1874 or 1875 as a minor matter, the Commissioners judged that the \u2018copious documentary evidence\u2019 as well as the \u2018facts beyond dispute\u2019 allowed a clear verdict. A series of assertions, such as the frequency of his visits to her house, stood unrefuted. That they had engaged in sexual relations over a period of years was, Butler concluded, \u2018morally certain\u2019.[CITATION-57] Two other factors appear to have worked against Capel. First, his efforts to tarnish Bellew\u2019s character backfired. Even if true, her drinking and lax morals made the accusation more and not less believable. As Butler stated, the testimony that Bellew was a \u2018depraved person would only prove what was consistent with the charge\u2019.[CITATION-58] But the Commissioners were not convinced that she was immoral. Far from the vengeful obsessive described by Capel, she had come forward reluctantly, tried to shield him from censure, and made a sincere display of her shame. She passed, to their eyes, the crucial character test. Furthermore, the social stigma attached to female promiscuity in this era also worked to her advantage. No respectable woman, as one Commissioner noted, would risk damaging her reputation by inventing a sexual relationship with a priest. Her story therefore was more likely to be true.The second problem for Capel was the cumulative effect of the allegations. While each case on its own was far from conclusive, taken together they left little room for doubt. Thomas John Capel, as Butler summed up, was \u2018gravely unsuited\u2019 to exercise the duties of a priest, and \u2018grave scandal\u2019 was sure to result if he continued in a public role. This judgment did not bring him any joy. \u2018God knows,\u2019 Butler ended, \u2018what it has cost me to write as I have done of one whom I have loved as a brother for over twenty years\u2019.[CITATION-59] What does this reveal about the Church\u2019s response to accusations of sexual misconduct? It shows that the Commission of Inquiry was capable of acting as an effective disciplinary mechanism. The Commissioners took seriously the allegations, gathering and weighing up reams of evidence, and finding against a widely admired cleric. Admittedly, they seemed to come to this decision reluctantly. \u2018No charge against a priest,\u2019 as Reverend Pennington noted in his judgment, \u2018should be admitted unless it is clearly proved\u2019.[CITATION-60] This was particularly true in cases involving women. In Pennington\u2019s eyes, jealousy was their reigning emotion, and the root of many accusations against handsome priests.[CITATION-61] Despite this bias, the commissioners believed the claims made by the three women, and judged a fellow priest to be a liar.What is clear as well is that this was a process expressly designed to avoid scandal. This may have been in part to protect the women\u2019s reputations in a society where even a hint of sexual impropriety could be extremely damaging. But diocesan authorities had other reasons to cover up the affair. There was, of course, the spectre of public scandal. The explosive charges would have damaged the reputation of the Catholic Church in England, and triggered a new wave of anti-Catholic polemics about lecherous and corrupt priests. But a scandal could take other forms as well. When Reverend Butler warned of \u2018grave scandal\u2019 if Capel continued in his office, it is likely that he had in mind a certain type of sin. In this theological understanding, scandal came about when an evil word or action led to the corruption of others. As Manning himself explained in his treatise on sin, an immoral act that was \u2018publicly and notoriously done\u2019 would \u2018give scandal to others\u2019 since it would \u2018encourage and invite\u2019 them to commit sin.[CITATION-62] The encouragement could be direct, as when a thief incited others to steal. But it could also be indirect. By setting a bad example, a priest who broke his vows might trigger a loss of faith amongst his parishioners. Capel was a revered figure in the Church. If he were exposed as a sexual predator, the demoralising impact on Catholics was sure to be immense. Maintaining a cloak of secrecy over Capel\u2019s actions protected the public reputation of the Church and its clergy. But the diocesan leaders may also have felt it their duty to prevent his actions scandalising, in the theological sense, countless numbers of the faithful.Whatever their reasons, they were remarkably successful in limiting public exposure. The odd reference in the press tended to be oblique. In March 1879, the bishop of Birmingham, William Ullathorne, sent Manning a clipping fromwhich referred to \u2018Capel\u2019s difficulties, pecuniary and otherwise\u2019, but gave no further details.[CITATION-63] The overriding desire to hush everything up was even more apparent in what happened next. Manning demanded two things of Capel. First, he was to submit to his authority and not undertake an appeal to Rome, a course of action which was sure to attract harmful publicity. Secondly, in exchange for not having a sentence recorded against him, he was to leave England and stay away \u2018for such a time as shall render your return free from danger to others and to yourself\u2019.[CITATION-64] Despite knowing his unsuitability for his office, Manning offered Capel the chance to escape a formal censure by moving to another jurisdiction and avoiding further scandal.At this point, another lesson became apparent: namely, that a priest at odds with his bishop could seek protection from the Vatican. Refusing to accept Manning\u2019s terms, Capel turned to Rome for a number of reasons. First, England was still a mission territory, and as such under the jurisdiction of the Congregation for the Propagation of the Sacred Faith (Propaganda) in Rome. The head of the Propaganda, Cardinal Giovanni Simeoni, had direct control over the administration and organisation of mission territories such as England, and his authority extended to matters of clerical discipline. Secondly, there were leading figures at Rome who were keen to help Capel, even if it was only to embarrass Manning. Chief among these were the Jesuits, who had clashed with the Cardinal over several issues, including the University. The Jesuits helped Capel in 1879, and afterwards pushed his cause at Rome.[CITATION-65] Manning was made aware of such machinations by William Lockhart, the Procurator-General of the Order of Charity. There were, he warned the Cardinal, \u2018plenty of people in Rome that, to say the least, would delight in giving you a humiliation\u2019. The Jesuits would strive for this end \u2018con amore\u2019.[CITATION-66] Above all there was the Vatican\u2019s track record of upholding appeals by priests, even in cases of sexual immorality. This was made clear in a startling letter written by Bishop Patrick Lynch of Toronto to Bishop John Corrigan of New York, who in turn gave it to Manning on the condition that he destroy it. It is easy to see why Corrigan was so worried about the letter\u2019s contents. In Lynch\u2019s estimate, the Propaganda upheld appeals by priests against their bishop in no fewer than 75 per cent of cases. This leniency extended to sexual crime, as Lynch knew very well. In his own diocese, a tribunal found a priest guilty of fathering a child. The priest immediately appealed to Rome where, through a combination of lies and forged documents, he managed to overturn the verdict. Even more gallingly, Lynch had to pay compensation to the priest. The outcome was also telling. The Propaganda\u2019s solution was to shift the offending priest abroad, in this case to Mexico, with $300 to cover his expenses.[CITATION-67] Capel, in turn, was no ordinary priest, but was uncommonly clever, well connected and unscrupulous. He began by appealing to the head of the Propaganda, Cardinal Simeoni, for the verdict of the Diocesan Commission to be overturned. When this appeal failed, he sought a fresh trial from another Vatican Congregation, the Holy Office of the Inquisition. Initially established to rule on charges of heresy, the Inquisition\u2019s authority extended to a broad range of questions concerning faith, including accusations of clerical sexual misconduct. As an investigative body, the Inquisition had the power to gather evidence and to issue a verdict which, if favourable to Capel, would put enormous pressure on Manning to accept his reinstatement. Capel\u2019s strategy involved, as ever, a full-barrelled attack on his accusers. The first target was Father Robinson, Emily Bellew\u2019s confessor, and a man who, Capel made sure to note in his submission to Rome, was born a Protestant. The opportunity came in 1881. Capel accused Robinson of one of the gravest offences against canon law: deliberately breaking the seal of the confessional. In his account, one of Robinson\u2019s penitents, John Rutherford-Smith, revealed to him that he had received a letter accusing his wife of having an affair with Capel. Rutherford-Smith believed this disclosure to be protected by the confessional seal. But Robinson, consumed as ever with \u2018jealousy\u2019 at Capel\u2019s success, set aside his obligation as confessor and rushed to inform Cardinal Manning.[CITATION-68] The accusations against Robinson soon became public. An anonymous circular was sent to priests in the diocese, and several newspapers then revealed the details of what they termed the \u2018Kensington Confession Case\u2019.[CITATION-69] Robinson would eventually be exonerated, with the Inquisition determining that Rutherford-Smith\u2019s revelation occurred outside the confessional.[CITATION-70] But the charge allowed Capel to paint a picture of a Westminster clique determined to bring him down, a picture that his supporters embellished even further. Edmund Leahy, brother of a Catholic archbishop, told the Propaganda that Capel was \u2018in every way a model and pattern of the purest propriety\u2019, a cleric whose success had inspired a \u2018vile spirit of jealousy\u2019 among his peers.[CITATION-71] The next target was Bellew. In an appeal at Westminster against his verdict and then a submission to the Inquisition at Rome, Capel went even further in depicting her as lustful and dissolute. An affidavit by Mrs Guppy Volckman stated that Bellew routinely spoke in gross terms about sexual matters, boasted of having many lovers and threatened to seduce her husband. Another by Rose Freeland recorded Bellew\u2019s scandalous behaviour during a trip to France, where she made no effort to restrain or hide her \u2018strong passions for men\u2019. Bellew herself, Freeland affirmed, \u2018told me details of her doings \u2026 that I could not commit to paper\u2019.[CITATION-72] The appeal at Westminster failed. Reverend Butler restated his position that even if true, the charges against Bellew made the probability of an illicit relationship with Capel more and not less likely, although he never wanted to give the impression that he \u2018thought well\u2019 of Bellew.[CITATION-73] But Capel hoped that the Inquisition might conclude that Bellew, another Protestant by birth, could not be believed.The final target was Manning himself. Rather than attacking the Cardinal directly, Capel turned to a woman named Anne Gomess. Born in India, Gomess married an English civil servant in Calcutta in 1857. Her involvement in the Capel scandal began in 1878 when, leaving her husband behind in India, she arrived in England. By 1881 she was living with her daughter and two sons in Kensington, a short distance from Capel\u2019s residence at Scarsdale Lodge. It is not clear how they met, but Gomess was soon embroiled in Capel\u2019s scheme to restore his reputation. In June 1882, both Pope Leo XIII and the secretary of the Inquisition, Cardinal Panebianco, received a letter from Gomess accusing Manning of improper behaviour. She visited him at his request on 11 March 1882. At that meeting, she wrote, he pressed her on what she knew about Capel\u2019s behaviour. His language, by her account, was deplorable. \u2018He put me questions\u2019, she wrote, \u2018of the grossest and vilest kind, too shameful to write\u2019. The exchange was, she continued, \u2018such a shock to my faith that I write to humbly ask the Office of the Inquisition to obtain for me proper satisfaction\u2019.[CITATION-74] The following year, Gomess would reveal that Capel forced her to write the letter under the threat of physical violence.[CITATION-75] But when combined with lobbying on the part of Capel and his supporters, the result was a review of the case by the Inquisition.The outcome showed the determination of the Vatican to salvage the career of a prominent cleric. In August 1882, the Inquisition found the charges against Capel to be \u2018not proven\u2019. While conceding that the number of accusations was troubling, it ruled that the Diocesan Commission did not follow proper judicial procedures. This was a strange decision, since the procedures of the Commission, which had been approved by Rome, expressly placed finding the truth ahead of judicial rigour. But Capel\u2019s attacks on the character of his accusers\u2014the references to their Protestant origins, the doubts about their motives and their morals\u2014struck a chord. According to the judgment, the elements which cast doubt on his guilt included the \u2018different religions\u2019 of his accusers, as well as their \u2018suspected venality\u2019. Tipping the balance further in his favour was his record of outstanding service to the Church. Here was a priest, in the words of the judgment, \u2018of such capacity and of such merit\u2019.[CITATION-76] For Capel, this was a signal victory. Admittedly, the Inquisition did not rule that he should immediately resume his office in Westminster, instead suggesting that he stay in Rome for some time to undertake a period of reflection and spiritual exercises before a supervised reintegration into the ministry. But the path was now open for his eventual return to Kensington.The aftermath of the verdict revealed two further aspects of the Vatican\u2019s approach to clerical scandal. The first was its desire for secrecy. The second was its apparent ignorance of the workings of the press in countries such as England. In January 1883, the Propaganda gave Manning a dressing down in language that, as he wrote to the Bishop of Salford, Herbert Vaughan, \u2018I should not have used to the youngest priest in my diocese\u2019.[CITATION-77] New documents had emerged, a letter from the Propaganda warned, that spoke in Capel\u2019s favour and put the Cardinal in a poor light. The nature of these documents was not made clear. But most of all the Propaganda admonished Manning for failing to cover up the scandal, and particularly for not keeping it out of the secular press. This complaint was triggered by an article entitled \u2018The Truth About Monsignor Capel\u2019 which appeared in thein October 1882. Without naming the charges against Capel explicitly, the article made their nature clear. \u2018No person\u2019, the author claimed, \u2018is so cruelly exposed to certain accusations as a good-looking Catholic priest who goes into mixed society\u2019. In particular, he was always vulnerable to the malicious tongues of \u2018semi-hysterical devotes\u2019. But the reader should be assured that there could be no doubt at all about his innocence.[CITATION-78] The same year, thepublished a cryptic image of a smiling Capel swinging his umbrella. This was apparently a coded reference to debauchery, at least in the view of one of Manning\u2019s correspondents, Alfred White, who told him that it \u2018has a bad signification\u2019.[CITATION-79] In response, Manning laid bare his exasperation with Rome and his determination not to back down. He first tried to make clear that the Archbishop of Westminster had no control over what appeared in the secular press. He could not simply ban journalists from writing such stories, and any attempt to do so was sure to backfire. But what angered him most was the prospect of Capel returning to Kensington. He refused to even consider the idea, and played on Rome\u2019s fear of public exposure. The \u2018notoriety\u2019, he wrote to an unnamed contact at the Vatican, \u2018of Mgr Capel\u2019s evil life \u2026 is so prevalent and scandalous\u2019 that his return to England was sure to trigger a series of embarrassing revelations.[CITATION-80] Manning received regular reports about the spread of the scandal. Father Edward S. Keogh, Superior of the London Oratory, judged that the details were known \u2018probably to all of the Clergy and certainly to many lay persons\u2019. Fortunately, the \u2018charity and discretion\u2019 of the clergy had stopped the news reaching the general public, which as a result knew only of his financial troubles.[CITATION-81] Manning was also aware of yet more scandals brewing. In February 1882, John Rutherford-Smith, the man at the centre of the case against his confessor Father Robinson, informed Reverend Daniel Gilbert, the Vicar-General of Westminster, that his wife admitted to adultery with Capel. It had begun three years earlier when he was her \u2018spiritual comforter\u2019.[CITATION-82] Rutherford-Smith was now threatening to launch divorce proceedings and to name Capel in open court.By 1883 a stand-off had developed. Buoyed by what he saw as a complete exoneration, Capel was insisting that he resume his duties in Kensington. Manning was more determined than ever to prevent this. At this point, a solution that suited both Rome and Westminster appeared. In line with Manning\u2019s initial offer to Capel, he would be shifted elsewhere. In June the Propaganda informed Manning that Capel would shortly be leaving for the United States. It was Rome\u2019s \u2018express desire\u2019 that \u2018silence be maintained\u2019, and that the Cardinal strive in particular to prevent any further stories appearing in the press.[CITATION-83] According to Reverend Daniel Butler, who was by then living in Rome and working actively as Manning\u2019s intermediary, this outcome was the work of Pope Leo XIII himself. Capel received a letter stating that he was \u2018without censure\u2019 in exchange for, in a term that Butler attributed to the Pope, \u2018hiding himself\u2019 in America.[CITATION-84] For the Westminster diocese, this was welcome news. As Butler told Cardinal Luigi Jacobini, the Vatican\u2019s Secretary of State, \u2018we are only too glad to be quiet\u2019.[CITATION-85] Manning in turn promised to use his influence with the Catholic press to conceal the true nature of the case. As for the secular press, he could only re-state that his authority over it was negligible.[CITATION-86] The career of Thomas Capel deserves to be better known. For more than a decade he was one of the most prominent ecclesiastics in England until, to the puzzlement of many of his contemporaries, he simply disappeared. As the journalist Sir Henry Lucy recalled, \u2018no one knew why he had gone or whither he had fled\u2019.[CITATION-87] Now that the archives are accessible and properly catalogued, the mystery of his downfall can be explained. But more than this, the archives give us a fine-grained portrait of the unfolding of a sexual scandal and its aftermath in the nineteenth-century Catholic Church. The story that emerges is that of an unscrupulous priest prepared to defy his bishop in a desperate effort to avoid punishment for his sexual crimes. But what the files also reveal is the reaction of Church leaders to accusations against the clergy, the workings of internal processes to deal with such cases, and the patterns of friction as well as co-operation between Rome and the diocese.Several points about the Church response stand out. The first is the reluctance to investigate an important and popular cleric. Cardinal Manning was renowned for his commitment to improving the quality and discipline of his clergy. Yet, though aware of serious charges from 1870, he took no substantial action until December 1878, when Capel was no longer rector of the University, and their relationship had broken down. From that point on, Manning took a firm stance, demanding that Capel leave the diocese, and refusing to entertain the possibility of his return even in the face of pressure from the Vatican. Would he, though, have taken such a hard line towards a more penitent priest? We cannot know the answer, but some of Manning\u2019s allies in the episcopacy signalled their willingness to adopt a tolerant approach under certain circumstances. Bishop William Clifford told Manning that as a general rule a superior should help one of his fallen priests to \u2018save his honour\u2019, on condition that he confess his sins and repent.[CITATION-88] Capel, though, chose to deny everything, to lash out at his accusers and to continue his pattern of reckless behaviour. In this situation, as Clifford reminded Manning, tolerance was a dangerous position for Church authorities to take.Secondly, the Diocesan Commission was rigorous in gathering and examining the evidence and remarkably effective in containing leaks to the press. Setting aside their scepticism towards women who accused priests, the Commissioners came to a unanimous judgment that one of their own was guilty of repeatedly breaking his vow of chastity. The weight of testimony against Capel was certainly hard to dismiss. Yet certain points might have at least created doubt. Capel forcefully protested his innocence, a stance he would maintain for the rest of his life. Lucy Stevens\u2019s account of an assault in the dining room did not square with the testimony of the bailiff. The two men who instigated the case, Dr Willington and Father Robinson, appeared to hold a grudge against Capel. There were inconsistencies in Bellew\u2019s evidence, and several witnesses painted her as deceitful and immoral. Yet none of this swayed the Commissioners from bringing a rogue priest to heel. Getting to the truth, however, was only part of their aim. Just as important was avoiding public exposure, whether to prevent the sin of scandal or to spare the image of the Church from being sullied. Among the Catholic community in Westminster, Capel\u2019s disgrace was an open secret. In the wake of his appeal to Rome, more overt references appeared in the press. Yet, in explaining his rift with Manning, commentators pointed only to the University collapse and Capel\u2019s claim for financial compensation. The damaging headlines so feared by the Cardinal and the Vatican were kept largely at bay.Another lesson is that the outcome of such cases came about through a complex interplay between the diocese and the Vatican. The letter of Archbishop Lynch followed by the overturning of the Commission\u2019s verdict showed that offending priests who appealed to Rome stood a good chance of success. Certainly Manning and his supporters were disillusioned with what they saw as Rome\u2019s leniency towards priests who broke their vows. In 1879, Reverend Butler recalled the case of another Monsignor who was known to have fathered six or seven children, and who nevertheless became a Cardinal. Rather than take a hard line, Rome usually preferred, in his view, to leave such cases to individual conscience, and failing that, the judgment of God.[CITATION-89] Capel was ideally placed to exploit this leniency. He had a network of supporters prepared to plead his case, and he drew strength as well from the animosity towards Manning among certain factions. But Manning, too, had supporters in Rome and this, combined with his obstinate refusal to allow Capel\u2019s return, lead to an outcome that seemed to suit both sides.On the evidence of the Capel investigation, women who accused priests faced a traumatic experience. Admittedly, this was not a feature of Church tribunals alone. Domestic servants such as Lucy Stevens who accused respectable men of sexual assault or rape stood little chance of success in Victorian courts. And while judges were beginning to limit the admissibility of evidence relating to previous sexual behaviour, women complainants still faced a harsh interrogation of their morals and character. Though the Commission believed her account, Emily Bellew was left scarred by the process. In 1882, she wrote to Manning. She was still gripped, she wrote, \u2018by a deep sense of my own unworthiness\u2019, but hoped the Cardinal would grant her a meeting.[CITATION-90] He evidently agreed, for in a follow-up letter expressing her thanks, she confessed her guilt at having offended God, and prayed for the fortitude to bear her trials.[CITATION-91] There is no evidence of further correspondence between them. For Mary Stourton, too, the repercussions were difficult to bear. She managed to reconcile with her family, and by 1881 was living with her mother and sister in Brighton. But the shadow of scandal was never far away. In 1882, she wrote to Manning to beg for his help. While walking in the street with her young sister, a Catholic acquaintance had snubbed her or, as Stourton put it, \u2018cut me\u2019. She had never \u2018felt so pained in my life.\u2019 For all her efforts to live quietly and piously, the past seemed always to rear up again.[CITATION-92] Eventually, however, she seemed to experience an upturn in her fortunes. In 1891 she was still living with her mother, but this time as Mrs Mary Graham, wife of James, whom she had married four years earlier. Anne Gomess also appears to have struggled in the years after the scandal. In 1890 she was pursued in the courts for non-payment of poor rates; in her defence she argued that as a married woman she should not be liable, even though her husband was still living in India. She remained in Kensington until her death in 1906.[CITATION-93] Finally, there is an instructive lesson in the perils of transferring an offending priest elsewhere. Capel\u2019s reception in America in 1883 was initially enthusiastic. The press acclaimed the arrival of a man who was \u2018better known than almost any other Anglo-Roman ecclesiastic\u2019.[CITATION-94] Journalists predicted that the affable, handsome and intelligent cleric would win a devoted American audience, a prediction that was soon realised. Capel wrote excitedly to Cardinal Simeoni at the Propaganda, describing crowds of between one and three thousand at his public lectures, and enclosing a newspaper clipping praising him as \u2018the grand social lion\u2019 blessed with a \u2018towering form and noble presence\u2019.[CITATION-95] He appeared to have outrun his past. Then, in October 1886, came a bombshell. Under the heading \u2018Monsignor Capel\u2019s downfall\u2019, several papers reported that he was living with a woman named Alice M. Valensin on her ranch in California, and that her husband, an Italian Count, had named him in divorce proceedings.[CITATION-96] Capel denied the charges, but his threats to sue for libel were greeted with mockery. The public scandal so feared by Church authorities had come to pass, and Rome was forced to act. On 10 July 1886, Manning learned that Capel had been suspended, meaning that he was barred from performing Mass and administering sacraments.[CITATION-97] The disgraced cleric ended his career in the diocese of Sacramento, where he died in obscurity in 1911.[CITATION-98] To a modern eye, this seems a sadly predictable outcome. Prompted by the wave of clerical sexual abuse scandals across recent decades, scholars have begun to scrutinise the historical record to determine if such behaviour, as well as the cover-ups on the part of church authorities, form part of a longer pattern. As a study of one case, albeit involving a very prominent cleric, this article can only hint at an answer. Yet it is difficult not to see intriguing parallels between past and present. The obsession with secrecy, the leniency of some Vatican officials, and the preparedness to move an offending priest rather than punish him all seem to echo recent revelations. For historians of the modern era, there is a pressing need to unearth similar cases in the archives, and thereby shed greater light on the roots of the immense crisis that has engulfed the Catholic Church today.",
    "footnotes": {
        "1": "J.D. Holmes, More Roman than Rome: English Catholicism in the Nineteenth Century (London, 1978), p. 231. Vincent Alan McClelland refers to Capel\u2019s \u2018liaison with a young woman\u2019 in his English Roman Catholics and Higher Education (Oxford, 1973), p. 316. For references to his disastrous tenure, see H.O. Evennett, \u2018Catholics and the Universities, 1850\u20131950\u2019, in G. Beck, ed., The English Catholics, 1850\u20131950: Essays to Commemorate the Centenary of the Restoration of the Hierarchy of England and Wales (London, 1950), p. 302; E.R. Norman, Roman Catholicism in England from the Elizabethan Settlement to the Second Vatican Council (New York, 1985), p. 80.",
        "2": "E.R. Norman, The English Catholic Church in the Nineteenth Century (Oxford, 1984), p. 271.",
        "3": "G.M. Murphy, \u2018Capel, Thomas John (1836\u20131911)\u2019, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography.",
        "4": "T. Horwood, \u2018The Rise and Fall of the Catholic University College, Kensington, 1868\u20131882\u2019, Journal of Ecclesiastical History, liv (2003), pp. 302\u201318.",
        "5": "Edmund Sheridan Purcell, Life of Cardinal Manning, Archbishop of Westminster (2 vols, London, 1896), ii, p. 503.",
        "6": "Ibid., ii, pp. 581\u20134.",
        "7": "Ibid., ii, p. 504.",
        "8": "Vincent McClelland cites Capel\u2019s \u2018moral failings\u2019 but gives no more detail: Cardinal Manning: His Public Life and Influence, 1865\u20131892 (London, 1962), p. 125. For other references, see S. Leslie, Henry Edward Manning: His Life and Labours (London, 1921), p. 187; R. Gray, Cardinal Manning: A Biography (London, 1985), p. 257.",
        "9": "J.L. Altholz came face to face with what he calls Chapeau\u2019s \u2018jealous control of the papers\u2019; see \u2018The \u201cWellesley Index\u201d and Religious Periodicals\u2019, Victorian Periodicals Review, xxvii (1994), p. 291.",
        "10": "Chapeau sold parts of the collection to university repositories. Although there was some pressure for the papers to remain at the University of Angers, their return to Westminster came about through the intervention of Professor Jacqueline Clais-Girard, a friend of Chapeau and a scholar of Manning. Her most recent study is Le cardinal des pauvres: Henry Edward Manning, 1808\u20131892 (Paris, 2016).",
        "11": "I would like to thank the current archivist of the Westminster Diocesan Archives, Father Nicholas Schofield, for this account. Father Schofield recalls seeing the files in 2005, when he took up his position, but their exact provenance remains a mystery.",
        "12": "For nineteenth-century England, see D.G. Paz, Popular Anti-Catholicism in Mid-Victorian England (Stanford, CA, 1992); J. Wolffe, The Protestant Crusade in Great Britain, 1829\u201360 (Oxford, 1991); S.D. Bernstein, Confessional Subjects: Revelations of Gender and Power in Victorian Literature and Culture (Chapel Hill, NC, 1997); D. Peschier, Nineteenth-Century Anti-Catholic Discourses: The Case of Charlotte Bronte\u0308 (New York, 2005); R. Kollar, A Foreign and Wicked Institution? The Campaign against Convents in Victorian England (Eugene, OR, 2011).",
        "13": "See J. Franchot, Roads to Rome: The Antebellum Protestant Encounter with Catholicism (Berkeley, CA, 1994); C.L. Yacovazzi, Escaped Nuns: True Womanhood and the Campaign against Convents in Antebellum America (New York, 2018).",
        "14": "An exception is Hubert Wolf\u2019s narrative of sexual disorders in the Roman convent of Sant\u2019Ambrogio, which draws on a series of files in the archives of the Inquisition: H. Wolf, The Nuns of Sant'Ambrogio: The True Story of a Convent in Scandal, tr. R. Martin (Oxford, 2015); J. Lalouette, La libre pens\u00e9e en France, 1848\u20131940 (Paris, 2001), p. 229. See also T. Verhoeven, Sexual Crime, Religion and Masculinity in Fin-de-Si\u00e8cle France : The Flamidien Affair (Basingstoke, 2018).",
        "15": "Among others, see B. Schimmelpfennig, \u2018Ex Fornicatione Nati: Studies on the Position of Priests\u2019 Sons from the Twelfth to the Fourteenth Century\u2019, Studies in Medieval and Renaissance History, ii (1980), pp. 3\u201350; R. Eichman, \u2018The \u201cPr\u00eatres Concubinaires\u201d of the Fabliaux\u2019, Australian Journal of French Studies, xxvii (1990), pp. 207\u201313; D.E. Bornstein, \u2018Priests and Villagers in the Diocese of Cortona\u2019, Ricerche Storiche, xxvii (1997), pp. 93\u2013106; M.A. Kelleher, \u2018\u201cLike Man and Wife\u201d: Clerics\u2019 Concubines in the Diocese of Barcelona\u2019, Journal of Medieval History, xxviii (2002), pp. 349\u201360; J. Werner, \u2018Promiscuous Priests and Vicarage Children: Clerical Sexuality and Masculinity in Late Medieval England\u2019, in J.D. Thibodeaux, ed., Negotiating Clerical Identities: Priests, Monks and Masculinity in the Middle Ages (New York, 2010), pp. 159\u201381; J.D. Thibodeaux, The Manly Priest: Clerical Celibacy, Masculinity, and Reform in England and Normandy, 1066\u20131300 (Philadelphia, PA, 2015).",
        "16": "S. Haliczer, Sexuality in the Confessional: A Sacrament Profaned (New York, 1996).",
        "17": "I. Fosi, Papal Justice: Subjects and Courts in the Papal State, 1500\u20131750, tr. T.V. Cohen (Washington, D.C., 2011), esp. ch. 9; M. Laven, \u2018Sex and Celibacy in Early Modern Venice\u2019, Historical Journal, xliv (2001), pp. 865\u201388.",
        "18": "K.E. Carter, Scandal in the Parish: Priests and Parishioners Behaving Badly in Eighteenth-Century France (Montreal, QC, 2019). See also E.C. Cage, Unnatural Frenchmen: The Politics of Priestly Celibacy and Marriage, 1720\u20131815 (Charlottesville, VA, 2015).",
        "19": "J. Bossy, The English Catholic Community, 1570\u20131850 (London, 1975); M. Heimann, Catholic Devotion in Victorian England (Oxford, 1995).",
        "20": "Norman, English Catholic Church in the Nineteenth Century, pp. 205\u20136. On the Catholic revival at mid-century, see J.L. Altholz, The Liberal Catholic Movement in England: The \u2018Rambler\u2019 and its Contributors, 1848\u20131864 (London, 1962); G. Parsons, \u2018Victorian Roman Catholicism: Emancipation, Expansion and Achievement\u2019, in G. Parsons, ed., Religion in Victorian Britain (5 vols, Manchester, 1988), i, pp. 146\u201383.",
        "21": "J.H. Newman, \u201cThe Second Spring: A Sermon Delivered to the First Provincial Council of Westminster, 1852\u201d, available via Internet Modern History Sourcebook (Internet History Sourcebooks Project, 1996\u2013), at https://sourcebooks.fordham.edu/mod/newman-secondspring.asp (accessed 12 Apr. 2022).",
        "22": "J. von Arx, \u2018Cardinal Manning and his Political Persona: The Education Act of 1870\u2019, in S. Gilley, ed., Victorian Churches and Churchmen: Essays Presented to Vincent Alan McClelland (Woodbridge, 2005), pp. 1\u201311.",
        "23": "Henry Edward Manning, The Eternal Priesthood (London, 1884), p. 71.",
        "24": "D. Newsome, The Convert Cardinals: John Henry Newman and Henry Edward Manning (London, 1993); J. von Arx, \u2018Two Cardinals: Conflict and Controversy in the Victorian Catholic Church\u2019, Newman Studies Journal, xvi (2019), pp. 99\u2013112.",
        "25": "McClelland, English Roman Catholics and Higher Education, p. 300. On their relationship, see R. Hannah, The Grand Designer: Third Marquess of Bute (Edinburgh, 2012).",
        "26": "The name is a reference to Robert Catesby (1572\u20131605), a leader of the Roman Catholic conspiracy to blow up the Houses of Parliament on 5 November 1605. Thanks to Stephen Conway for suggesting this.",
        "27": "Vanity Fair, 7 Sept. 1872.",
        "28": "Whitehall Review, reprinted in Londonderry Sentinel, 27 Aug. 1878.",
        "29": "G.S. Layard, Shirley Brooks of Punch: His Life, Letters, and Diaries (New York, 1907), p. 461.",
        "30": "L.T. Remlap [Loomis T. Palmer], General Grant\u2019s Tour around the World: With a Sketch of his Life (Chicago, IL, 1879), p. 52.",
        "31": "Morning Post, 10 Nov. 1873.",
        "32": "Pulpit and Pew: Sketches of Popular Preachers of the Period, by an Anglican Layman (London, 1877), p. 233.",
        "33": "Manchester Guardian, cited in Pall Mall Gazette, 11 Nov. 1873.",
        "34": "London, Archives of the Archdiocese of Westminster [hereafter AAW], Manning Papers, 2/3/50, undated statement.",
        "35": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/8, Mary Stourton to Manning, n.d.",
        "36": "Robert E. Guy, The Synods in English: Being the Text of the Four Synods of Westminster Translated into English (Stratford-upon-Avon, 1886), p. 141.",
        "37": "Ibid., p. 150.",
        "38": "Giuseppe Frassinetti, The New Parish Priest\u2019s Practical Manual, tr. William Hutch (London, 1883), pp. 468\u20139.",
        "39": "Guy, Synods in English, p. 158.",
        "40": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/96, Capel to Manning, 24 Nov. 1875.",
        "41": "C. Conley, The Unwritten Law: Criminal Justice in Victorian Kent (New York, 1991), pp. 81\u201395; K. Stevenson, \u2018\u201cIngenuities of the Female Mind\u201d: Legal and Public Perceptions of Sexual Violence in Victorian England, 1850\u20131890\u2019, in S. D\u2019Cruze, ed., Everyday Violence in Britain, 1850\u20131950: Gender and Class (New York, 2000), pp. 89\u2013103. Martin J. Wiener argues that Victorian courts gradually came to restrict evidence of a defendant\u2019s sexual history: Men of Blood: Violence, Manliness and Criminal Justice in Victorian England (Cambridge, 2004), p. 100.",
        "42": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/98, Capel to Manning, 29 Nov. 1875.",
        "43": "Horwood, \u2018Rise and Fall of the Catholic University\u2019; Norman, English Catholic Church in the Nineteenth Century, p. 299; Newsome, Convert Cardinals, pp. 324\u20135.",
        "44": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/74, undated document.",
        "45": "Cited in McClelland, English Roman Catholics and Higher Education, p. 317.",
        "46": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/150, Henry Willington to Manning, 5 Dec. 1878.",
        "47": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/156, undated testimony of Lucy Stevens.",
        "48": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/166, Minutes of Inquiry.",
        "49": "See Wiener, Men of Blood, pp. 100\u2013101; S. D\u2019Cruze, Crimes of Outrage: Sex, Violence and Victorian Working Women (London, 1997), pp. 88\u201390.",
        "50": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/24, Charges made by Mrs Bellew, Reply of Monsignor Capel. On the railway accident, see The Tablet, 21 Sept. 1878.",
        "51": "Ibid.",
        "52": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/167, Monsignor Capel\u2019s Defence.",
        "53": "Ibid.",
        "54": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/26, Emily Bellew to Capel, no date. Emphasis in original.",
        "55": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/208, Bellew to Walter Robinson, 1 Feb. 1879.",
        "56": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/72, undated letter.",
        "57": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/171, Commissioners\u2019 Statement, Mar. 1879.",
        "58": "Ibid.",
        "59": "Ibid.",
        "60": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/233.",
        "61": "Ibid.",
        "62": "Henry Edward Manning, Sin and its Consequences (2nd edn, London, 1874), p. 88.",
        "63": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/36/176, William Ullathorne to Manning, 29 Mar. 1879.",
        "64": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/258, Manning to Capel, 18 June 1879.",
        "65": "McClelland, English Roman Catholics and Higher Education, p. 325.",
        "66": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/439, William Lockhart to Manning, 6 Nov. 1882.",
        "67": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/31/27, Patrick Lynch to John Corrigan, 20 Nov. 1883.",
        "68": "Vatican City, Archive of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith [hereafter ACDF], Contra R.P.D. Thomas Capel, antistitem urbanum S.S., delatum de pretensis immoralitatibus aliisque, Pars IIA, Capel to Archbishop Vincenzo Sallua, 4 Apr. 1881.",
        "69": "For a copy of the flier, see AAW, Manning papers, 2/32/50. Newspaper accounts include the Daily Chronicle, 7 May 1881, and Whitehall Review, 9 Feb. 1882. Capel denied that he was the author of the circular or responsible for the press articles: AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/370, Capel to Daniel Gilbert, 18 Feb. 1882.",
        "70": "ACDF, Contra R.P.D. Thomas Capel, antistitem urbanum S.S., delatum de pretensis immoralitatibus aliisque, Pars Iia, \u2018Sulla violazione del Sigillo Sacramentale apposta al Rev. Sacer. W.C. Robinson della diocesi di Westminster. Relazione e Parere Con Sommario\u2019, Apr. 1882.",
        "71": "Rome, Propaganda Fide Historical Archives [hereafter PFHA], Scritte Referite Nei Congressi, Anglia, vol. 24 (1881/82), Edmund Leahy to Cardinal Giovanni Simeoni, 25 July 1882.",
        "72": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/23, affidavits, no date.",
        "73": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/320, Opinion Upon the Second Reply of Mgr. Capel, 19 Sept. 1880.",
        "74": "ACDF, Contra R.P.D. Thomas Capel, antistitem urbanum S.S., delatum de pretensis immoralitatibus aliisque, Pars IA, Anne Gomess to Niccol\u00f2 Panebianco, 1 June 1882.",
        "75": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/12/515, unsigned statement, 24 July 1883.",
        "76": "ACDF, Contra R.P.D. Thomas Capel, antistitem urbanum S.S., delatum de pretensis immoralitatibus aliisque, Pars IIa (c), Suprema Sacra Congregazione Del S. Uffizio, Relazione e Voto Con Sommario, Aug. 1882.",
        "77": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/12/40, Manning to Herbert Vaughan, 19 Feb. 1883.",
        "78": "Whitehall Review, 26 Oct. 1882.",
        "79": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/452, Alfred White to Manning, 11 Dec. 1882.",
        "80": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/475, Manning to unknown, 9 May 1883.",
        "81": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/405, Edward Keogh to Manning, 10 July 1882.",
        "82": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/359, John Rutherford-Smith to Daniel Gilbert, 7 Feb. 1882.",
        "83": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/510, Simeoni to Manning, 25 June 1883.",
        "84": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/511, Daniel Butler to Manning, 27 June 1883.",
        "85": "Ibid.",
        "86": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/510, Manning to Simeoni, 28 June 1883.",
        "87": "Henry Lucy, The Diary of a Journalist (3 vols, New York, 1923), iii, p. 60.",
        "88": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/169, William Clifford to Manning, 28 May 1879.",
        "89": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/84, Butler to Manning, 28 June 1879.",
        "90": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/389, Bellew to Manning, 22 Apr. 1882.",
        "91": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/392, Bellew to Manning, 25 Apr. 1882.",
        "92": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/397, Stourton to Manning, 5 May 1882. Emphasis in original.",
        "93": "On the legal case, see Morning Post, 17 Jan. 1890.",
        "94": "Frank Leslie\u2019s Illustrated Newspaper, 8 Sept. 1883.",
        "95": "PFHA, Scritte Referite Nei Congressi, Anglia, vol. 24 (1881/82), Capel to Simeoni, 12 Oct. 1883.",
        "96": "Washington Post, 6 Oct. 1886.",
        "97": "AAW, Manning Papers, 2/3/540, J.O. Callaghan to Manning, 10 July 1886.",
        "98": "Capel continued to live with Alice M. Valensin after his disgrace. I thank Dr Kim Reynolds for providing this and further valuable information regarding the lives of Anne Gomess, Mary Stourton and Capel."
    }
}